@node Python Interface
@section Python Interface
Certain Sherpa classes and methods can be made available to the Python
interpreter in the form of an extension module. This module can be
loaded in Python and provides access to certain functionalities of the
Sherpa event generator in Python. In order to build the module, Sherpa
must be configured with the option @code{--enable-pyext}. Running
@code{make} then invokes the automated interface generator SWIG
@mycite{Beazley2003} to create the Sherpa module using the Python C/C++
API. SWIG version 1.3.x or later is required for a successful build.
Problems might occur if more than one version of Python is present on
the system since automake currently doesn't always handle multiple
Python installations properly. If you have multiple Python versions
installed on your system, please set the @code{PYTHON} environment
variable to the Python 2 executable via 
@verbatim
  export PYTHON=<path-to-python2>
@end verbatim
before executing the @code{configure} script (see.

The following script is a minimal example that shows how to use the
Sherpa module in Python. In order to load the Sherpa module, the
location where it is installed must be added to the PYTHONPATH. There
are several ways to do this, in this example the sys module is used. The
sys module also allows it to directly pass the command line arguments
used to run the script to the initialization routine of Sherpa. The
script can thus be executed using the normal command line options of
Sherpa (see @ref{Command line}). Furthermore it illustrates how
exceptions that Sherpa might throw can be taken care of. If a run card
is present in the directory where the script is executed, the
initialization of the generator causes Sherpa to compute the cross
sections for the processes specified in the run card. See
@ref{Matrix Element values through Python interface} for
an example that shows how to use the Python interface to compute matrix
elements or @ref{Events} to see how the interface can be used to
generate events in Python.

Note that if you have compiled Sherpa with MPI support, you need to
source the @uref{http://mpi4py.scipy.org,,mpi4py} module using
@code{from mpi4py import MPI}.

@verbatim
  #!/usr/bin/python
  import sys
  sys.path.append('<sherpa-prefix>/lib/<your-python-version>/site-packages/>')
  import Sherpa

  # set up the generator
  Generator=Sherpa.Sherpa()

  try:
      # initialize the generator, pass command line arguments to initialization routine
      Generator.InitializeTheRun(len(sys.argv),sys.argv)

  # catch exceptions
  except Sherpa.Exception as exc:
      print exc
@end verbatim
