@node Beam Parameters
@section Beam parameters
@cindex BEAM_1
@cindex BEAM_2
@cindex BEAM_ENERGY_1
@cindex BEAM_ENERGY_2

The setup of the colliding beams is covered by the @code{(beam)}
section of the steering file or the beam data file @code{Beam.dat},
respectively, see @ref{Input structure}. The @emph{mandatory settings} to be made are

@itemize @bullet
@item The initial beam particles specified through 
@option{BEAM_1} and @option{BEAM_2}, given by their PDG 
particle number. For (anti)protons and (positrons) electrons, 
for example, these are given by (-)2212 or (-)11, respectively. 
The code for photons is 22. 
@item The energies of both incoming beams, defined through 
@option{BEAM_ENERGY_1} and @option{BEAM_ENERGY_2}, 
given in units of GeV. Beam energies may also be specified
as a second argument to @option{BEAM_1} and @option{BEAM_2}.
@end itemize

More options related to beamstrahlung and intrinsic transverse momentum can
be found in the following subsections.

@menu
* Beam Spectra::  Options related to beamstrahlung
* Intrinsic Transverse Momentum:: Options related to primordial transverse momentum
@end menu

@node Beam Spectra
@subsection Beam Spectra
@cindex BEAM_SPECTRUM_1
@cindex BEAM_SPECTRUM_2
@cindex SPECTRUM_FILE_1
@cindex SPECTRUM_FILE_2
@cindex BEAM_SMIN
@cindex BEAM_SMAX

If desired, you can also specify spectra for beamstrahlung through
@code{BEAM_SPECTRUM_1} and @code{BEAM_SPECTRUM_2}. The possible values are
Possible values are
@table @option
@item Monochromatic
The beam energy is unaltered and the beam particles remain unchanged. 
That is the default and corresponds to ordinary hadron-hadron or 
lepton-lepton collisions.
@item Laser_Backscattering
This can be used to describe the backscattering of a laser beam
off initial leptons. The energy distribution of the emerging 
photon beams is modelled by the CompAZ parametrization, see
@mycite{Zarnecki2002qr}.
Note that this parametrization is valid only for the proposed 
TESLA photon collider, as various assumptions about the laser 
parameters and the initial lepton beam energy have been made.
See details below.
@item Simple_Compton
This corresponds to a simple light backscattering 
off the initial lepton beam and produces initial-state 
photons with a corresponding energy spectrum.  See details below.
@item EPA
This enables the equivalent photon approximation for
colliding protons, see @mycite{Archibald2008aa}. The resulting beam particles are photons that 
follow a dipole form factor parametrization, cf. @mycite{Budnev1974de}.
The authors would like to thank T. Pierzchala for his help in
implementing and testing the corresponding code. See details below.
@item Spectrum_Reader
A user defined spectrum is used to describe the energy spectrum
of the assumed new beam particles. The name of the corresponding
spectrum file needs to be given through the keywords
@code{SPECTRUM_FILE_1} and @code{SPECTRUM_FILE_2}.
@end table

The @code{BEAM_SMIN} and @code{BEAM_SMAX} parameters may be used to specify the
minimum/maximum fraction of cms energy
squared after Beamstrahlung. The reference value is the total centre
of mass energy squared of the collision, @emph{not} the 
centre of mass energy after eventual Beamstrahlung.
@*
The parameter can be specified using the internal interpreter, see
@ref{Interpreter}, e.g. as @samp{BEAM_SMIN sqr(20/E_CMS)}.

@subsubsection Laser Backscattering
@cindex E_LASER_
@cindex E_LASER_
@cindex P_LASER_
@cindex P_LASER_
@cindex LASER_MODE
@cindex LASER_ANGLES
@cindex LASER_NONLINEARITY
The energy distribution of the photon beams is modelled by the CompAZ
parametrisation, see @mycite{Zarnecki2002qr}, with various assumptions
valid only for the proposed TESLA photon collider. The laser energies
can be set by @code{E_LASER_1/2} for the respective beam. @code{P_LASER_1/2}
sets their polarisations, defaulting to @code{0.}. The @code{LASER_MODE}
takes the values @code{-1}, @code{0}, and @code{1}, defaulting to @code{0}.
@code{LASER_ANGLES} and @code{LASER_NONLINEARITY} take the values @code{On}
and @code{Off}, both defaulting to @code{Off}.

@subsubsection Simple Compton
This corresponds to a simple light backscattering off the initial lepton
beam and produces initial-state photons with a corresponding energy spectrum.
It is a special case of the above Laser Backscattering with
@code{LASER_MODE=-1}.

@subsubsection EPA
@cindex EPA_q2Max_1
@cindex EPA_q2Max_2
@cindex EPA_ptMin_1
@cindex EPA_ptMin_2
@cindex EPA_Form_Factor_1
@cindex EPA_Form_Factor_2
@cindex EPA_AlphaQED

The equivalent photon approximation,
cf. @mycite{Archibald2008aa}, @mycite{Budnev1974de},
has a few free parameters:
@table @option
@item EPA_q2Max_1/2
Parameter of the EPA spectrum of the respective beam, defaults to @code{2.}
in units of GeV squared.
@item EPA_ptMin_1/2
Infrared regulator to EPA spectrum. Given in GeV, the value must be
between @code{0.} and @code{1.} for EPA approximation to hold.
Defaults to @code{0.}, i.e. the spectrum
has to be regulated by cuts on the observable, cf @ref{Selectors}.
@item EPA_Form_Factor_1/2
Form factor model to be used on the respective beam. The options are
@code{0} (pointlike), @code{1} (homogeneously charged sphere,
@code{2} (gaussian shaped nucleus), and @code{3} (homogeneously charged
sphere, smoothed at low and high x). Applicable only to heavy ion beams.
Defaults to @code{0}.
@item EPA_AlphaQED
Value of alphaQED to be used in the EPA. Defaults to @code{0.0072992701}.
@end table

@node Intrinsic Transverse Momentum
@subsection Intrinsic Transverse Momentum
@cindex K_PERP_MEAN_1
@cindex K_PERP_MEAN_2
@cindex K_PERP_SIGMA_1
@cindex K_PERP_SIGMA_2
@cindex BEAM_REMNANTS

@table @option
@item K_PERP_MEAN_1
This parameter specifies the mean intrinsic transverse
momentum for the first (left) beam in case of hadronic 
beams, such as protons.
@*
The default value for protons is 0.8 GeV.

@item K_PERP_MEAN_2
This parameter specifies the mean intrinsic transverse
momentum for the second (right) beam in case of hadronic 
beams, such as protons.
@*
The default value for protons is 0.8 GeV.

@item K_PERP_SIGMA_1
This parameter specifies the width of the Gaussian distribution
of intrinsic transverse momentum for the first (left) beam in 
case of hadronic beams, such as protons.
@*
The default value for protons is 0.8 GeV.

@item K_PERP_SIGMA_2
This parameter specifies the width of the Gaussian distribution
of intrinsic transverse momentum for the first (left) beam in 
case of hadronic beams, such as protons.
@*
The default value for protons is 0.8 GeV.

@end table

If the option @option{BEAM_REMNANTS=0} is specified, pure parton-level
events are simulated, i.e. no beam remnants are generated. Accordingly,
partons entering the hard scattering process do not acquire primordial
transverse momentum.
