@node Cross section
@chapter Cross section

To determine the total cross section, in particular in the context of
ME+PS merging with Sherpa, the final output of the event generation
run should be used, e.g.
@verbatim
+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                                     |
|  Total XS is 1612.17 pb +- ( 8.48908 pb = 0.52 % )  |
|                                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------+
@end verbatim
Note that the Monte Carlo error quoted for the total cross section is
determined during event generation. It, therefore, might differ
substantially from the errors quoted during the integration step,
and it can be reduced simply by generating more events.

In contrast to plain fixed order results, Sherpa's total cross section
is composed of values from various fixed order processes, namely
those which are combined by applying the ME+PS merging, see @ref{Merging ME and PS}.
In this context, it is important to note that

@b{The exclusive higher order tree-level cross sections determined during the
integration step are meaningless by themselves, only the inclusive cross section 
printed at the end of the event generation run is to be used.}

This value has the same formal accuracy as a fixed order result for the 
inclusive reaction (e.g. pp->Z in @ref{Running Sherpa}), but it might still differ 
by a significant amount, see @mycite{Hoeche2009rj} and @mycite{Lonnblad2012ng} for details. 
Depending on jet definitions, process etc., the merged cross section may be either 
larger or smaller than the fixed order cross section.

@strong{Sherpa total cross sections have leading order accuracy when the generator
  is run in LO merging mode, in NLO merging mode they have NLO accuracy.}

Broadly speaking, Sherpa's ME-PS merging is adequate for capturing the information 
from (resummed) logarithmic corrections to the leading order (as is the parton shower).
On the contrary, higher-order cross sections are dominated by finite terms when 
they are computed inclusively. Sherpa's merging algorithm cannot predict the finite terms, 
and this is why Sherpa's cross section is not a better approximation to higher-order
cross sections. On the other hand, shape observables (especially jet transverse momenta 
and the like) are typically dominated by logarithmic corrections. 
If they are concerned, Sherpa can be expected to perform reasonably well.
