@node LEP_Jets
@subsection Jets at lepton colliders

@menu
* LEP_Jets_LOmerging::
* LEP_Jets_NLOmerging::
@end menu

This section contains two setups to describe jet production at LEP I, 
either through multijet merging at leading order accuracy or at 
next-to-leading order accuracy.

@node LEP_Jets_LOmerging
@subsubsection MEPS setup for ee->jets

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/Jets_at_LeptonColliders/LEP_Jets/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

This example shows a LEP set up, with electrons and positrons colliding 
at a centre of mass energy of 91.25GeV. Two processes have been specified, 
one final state with two or more light quarks and gluons being produced,
and one with a b b-bar pair and possibly extra light partons. Four 
b quark production is also included for consistencies sake.

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item the b-quark mass has been enabled for the matrix element calculation
(the default is massless) because it is not negligible for LEP energies
@item the b b-bar process is specified separately because the 
@option{93} particle container contains only partons set massless in the matrix
element calculation, see @ref{Particle containers}. 
@item some model parameters have been set. In this example, the running 
of alpha_s is set to leading order and the value of alpha_s at the Z-mass 
is set.
@end itemize

@node LEP_Jets_NLOmerging
@subsubsection MEPS@@NLO setup for ee->jets

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/Jets_at_LeptonColliders/LEP_Jets/Run.NLO.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

This example expands upon the above setup, elevating its description 
of hard jet production to next-to-leading order.

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item the b-quark mass has been enabled for the matrix element calculation
(the default is massless) because it is not negligible for LEP energies
@item the b b-bar process is specified separately because the 
@option{93} particle container contains only partons set massless in the matrix
element calculation, see @ref{Particle containers}. 
@item some model parameters have been set. In the 
@code{(model)} section of the run-card, parameters relating
to the model can be set. In this example, the value of alpha_s at the 
Z mass is set.
@end itemize

