@node LHC_HJets
@subsection H+jets production in gluon fusion

This is an example setup for inclusive Higgs production through 
gluon fusion at hadron colliders used in @mycite{Hoeche2014lxa}.
The inclusive process is calculated
at next-to-leading order accuracy matched to the parton shower using 
the MC@@NLO prescription detailed in @mycite{Hoeche2011fd}. The next 
few higher jet multiplicities, calculated at next-to-leading order as well, 
are merged into the inclusive sample using the MEPS@@NLO method - an 
extension of the CKKW method to NLO - as described in @mycite{Hoeche2012yf} 
and @mycite{Gehrmann2012yg}. Finally, even higher multiplicities, calculated 
at leading order, are merged on top of that. A few things to note are 
detailed below the example. The example can be converted a simple MENLOPS 
setup by setting @code{LJET:=2}, or an MEPS setup by setting @code{LJET:=0}, 
to study the effect of incorporating higher-order matrix elements.

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/H_in_GluonFusion/LHC_HJets/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize
@item Any setting with the exception of the process and selector definitions 
can be given in the @code{(run)@{...@}(run)} section of the run card.
@item Tags (@code{FSF}, @code{RSF} and @code{QSF}) have been introduced for 
easy scale variations. Tags are replaced throughout the entire run card by
their defined value, see @ref{Tags}.
@item Tags (@code{LJET}, @code{NJET} and @code{QCUT}) have been introduced 
to be used in the process setup, defining the multiplicity of the MC@@NLO 
subprocesses, the maximal number of extra jets, and the merging cut.
@item The @code{LOOPGEN<i>} tag is used to name the providers of the one-loop 
matrix elements for the respective multiplicities. For the two simplemost cases 
Sherpa can provide it internally. Additionally, MCFM is interfaced for the
H+2jet process, cf. @ref{MCFM interface}.
@item To enable the Higgs to decay to a pair of photons, for example, the 
hard decays are invoked.
For details on the hard decay handling and how to enable specific decay modes 
see @ref{Hard decays}. As in the Higgs case the branching ratios calculated
by Sherpa at the leading order receive large corrections a modified BR table
to be read in by Sherpa is provided.
@end itemize
 
