@node LHC_Jets
@subsection Jet production

@menu
* LHC_Jets_MCatNLO::
* LHC_Jets_MEPS::
@end menu

To change any of the following LHC examples to production at the Tevatron 
simply change the beam settings to
@verbatim
  BEAM_1  2212; BEAM_ENERGY_1 980;
  BEAM_2 -2212; BEAM_ENERGY_2 980;
@end verbatim

@node LHC_Jets_MCatNLO
@subsubsection MC@@NLO setup for dijet and inclusive jet production

This is an example setup for dijet and inclusive jet production at hadron 
colliders at next-to-leading order precission matched to the parton shower 
using the MC@@NLO prescription detailed in @mycite{Hoeche2011fd} and 
@mycite{Hoeche2012fm}. A few things to note are detailed below the example. 


@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/Jets_at_HadronColliders/LHC_Jets_MCatNLO/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize
@item Any setting with the exception of the process and selector definitions 
can be given in the @code{(run)@{...@}(run)} section of the run card.
@item Tags (@code{FSF}, @code{RSF} and @code{QSF}) have been introduced for 
easy scale variations. Tags are replaced troughout the entire run card by 
their defined value, see @ref{Tags}.
@item Asymetric cuts are implemented (relevant to the RS-piece of an MC@@NLO 
calculation) by requiring at least two jets with pT > @code{J2CUT}, one of 
which has to have pT > @code{J1CUT}.
@item Both the factorisation and renormalisation scales are set to the above 
defined scale factors times the a quarter of the scalar sum of the transvers 
momenta of all anti-kt jets (R=0.4,pT>@code{J1CUT}) found on the ME-level 
before any parton shower emission. See @ref{SCALES} for details on scale 
setters.
@item The resummation scale, which sets the maximum scale of the additional 
emission to be resummed by the parton shower, is set to the above defined 
resummation scale factor times half of the transverse momentum of the softer 
of the two jets present at Born level.
@item The generator to provide the one-loop matrix element can be set through 
@code{LOOPGEN} tag. For possible choices see TODO.
@item The @code{NLO_QCD_Mode} is set to @code{MC@@NLO}.
@end itemize


@node LHC_Jets_MEPS
@subsubsection MEPS setup for jet production

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/Jets_at_HadronColliders/LHC_Jets_MEPS/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{Order} is set to @option{(*,0)}. This
ensures that all final state jets are produced via 
the strong interaction.

@item
an @code{NJetFinder} selector is used to 
set a resolution criterion for the two jets of the core process.
This is necessary because the `CKKW' tag does not apply any cuts to the core
process, but only to the extra-jet matrix elements, see 
@ref{Multijet merged event generation with Sherpa}.
This cut is applied only to the 2->2 process using the @code{@{2@}}
specification, since the higher-order matrix elements should only be cut by
the ME+PS separation criterion.
@end itemize
