@node LHC_WJets
@subsection W+jets production

To change any of the following LHC examples to production at different
collider energies or beam types, e.g. proton anti-proton at the Tevatron,
simply change the beam settings to.


This is an example setup for inclusive W production at hadron colliders. 
The inclusive process is calculated at next-to-leading order accuracy matched 
to the parton shower using the MC@@NLO prescription detailed in 
@mycite{Hoeche2011fd}. The next few higher jet multiplicities, calculated at 
next-to-leading order as well, are merged into the inclusive sample using 
the MEPS@@NLO method - an extension of the CKKW method to NLO - as described 
in @mycite{Hoeche2012yf} and @mycite{Gehrmann2012yg}. Finally, even higher 
multiplicities, calculated at leading order, are merged on top of that.
A few things to note are detailed below the example. The example can be 
converted into a simple MENLOPS setup by setting @code{LJET:=2}, or an MEPS 
setup by setting @code{LJET:=0}, to study the effect of incorporating 
higher-order matrix elements. The number of additional LO jets can be varied
through @code{NJET}. Similarly, the merging cut can be changed through
@code{QCUT}.

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_WJets/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize
@item Any setting with the exception of the process and selector definitions 
can be given in the @code{(run)@{...@}(run)} section of the run card.
@item Tags (@code{FSF}, @code{RSF} and @code{QSF}) have been introduced for 
easy scale variations. Tags are replaced throughout the entire run card by 
their defined value, see @ref{Tags}.
@item All scales, i.e. the squared factorisation, renormalisation and resummation 
scales are set to the above defined scale factors times the value determined 
by the METS-clustering algorithm. For the usual scale variation by a factor of
two one would thus use e.g. @code{FSF:=4.0}.
@item Tags (@code{LJET}, @code{NJET} and @code{QCUT}) have been introduced 
to be used in the process setup, defining the multiplicity of the MC@@NLO 
subprocesses, the maximal number of extra jets, and the merging cut.
@item The @code{LOOPGEN} tag is used to name the provider of the one-loop
matrix elements for the respective multiplicities. For the simplemost case 
here Sherpa can provide it internally.
@item tau leptons are set massive in order to exclude them from the massless 
lepton container (@code{90}).
@item As both Comix and Amegic are specified as matrix element generators 
to be used, Amegic has to be specified to be used for all MC@@NLO 
multiplicities using @code{ME_Generator Amegic @{LJET@}}. Additionally, we
specify @code{RS_ME_Generator Comix @{LJET@}} such that the subtracted
real-emission bit of the NLO matrix elements is calculated more efficiently
with Comix instead of Amegic.
@item The @code{LOOSE_METS} scale setter, a simplified version of the
@code{METS} scale setter, is used for the highest multiplicities (if
@code{NJET} is set to @code{5} or @code{6}) to speed up the calculation.
@end itemize

The jet criterion used to define the matrix element multiplicity in the
context of multijet merging can be supplied by the user. As an example
the source code file @code{./Examples/V_plus_Jets/LHC_WJets/My_JetCriterion.C}
provides such an alternative jet criterion. It can be compiled using
@code{SCons} via executing @code{scons} in that directory (edit the
@code{SConstruct} file accordingly). The newly created library is linked
at run time using the @code{SHERPA_LDADD} flag.
The new jet criterion is then evoked by @code{JET_CRITERION}.

