@node LHC_HInt
@subsection H production in gluon fusion with interference effects
@cindex HIGGS_INTERFERENCE_MODE
@cindex HIGGS_INTERFERENCE_ONLY
@cindex HIGGS_INTERFERENCE_SPIN

This is a setup for inclusive Higgs production through 
gluon fusion at hadron colliders. The inclusive process is calculated 
at next-to-leading order accuracy, including all interference effects
between Higgs-boson production and the SM gg->yy background.
The corresponding matrix elements are taken from @mycite{Bern2002jx} 
and @mycite{Dixon2013haa}. 

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/H_in_GluonFusion/LHC_HInterference/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize
@item This calculation is at fixed-order NLO.
@item All scales, i.e. the factorisation, renormalisation and resummation
scales are set to the invariant mass of the di-photon pair.
@item Dedicated phase space generators are used by setting 
@option{Integrator PS2;} and @option{RS_Integrator PS3;}, cf. @ref{Integrator}.
@end itemize

To compute the interference contribution only, as was done in @mycite{Dixon2013haa},
one can set @option{HIGGS_INTERFERENCE_ONLY 1;} in the @code{(run)@{...@}(run)} section.
By default, all partonic processes are included in this simulation, however, 
it is sensible to disable quark initial states at the leading order. This is achieved 
by setting @option{HIGGS_INTERFERENCE_MODE 3;} in the @code{(run)@{...@}(run)} section.
 
One can also simulate the production of a spin-2 massive graviton in Sherpa using
the same input card by setting @option{HIGGS_INTERFERENCE_SPIN 2;} in the 
@code{(run)@{...@}(run)} section. Only the massive graviton case is implemented, 
specifically the scenario where k_q=k_g. NLO corrections are approximated, 
as the gg->X->yy and qq->X->yy loop amplitudes have not been computed so far.
