@node Matrix Element values through Python interface
@subsection Computing matrix elements for idividual phase space points using the Python Interface
Sherpa's Python interface (see @ref{Python Interface}) can be used to
compute matrix elemtents for individual phase space points.  Access to a
designated class ``MEProcess'' is provided by interface to compute
matrix elements as illustrated in the example script.

Please note that the process in the script must be compatible with the
one specified in the run card in the working directory.  This also
applies to the initial state particle momenta as well as the masses of
all external particles.

If AMEGIC++ is used as the matrix element generator, executing the
script will result in AMEGIC++ writing out libraries and exiting.
After compiling the libraries using @code{./makelibs}, the script must
be executed again in order to obtain the matrix element. On some
systems, this might result in a termination with errors of the form
@verbatim
Library_Loader::LoadLibrary(): ./Process/lib/libProc_P2_2_2_6_24_16_5_0.so: undefined symbol: _ZN6AMEGIC10Basic_Func1XEiii
@end verbatim

If this is the case, the library libSherpaMain.so must be preloaded,
which can be achieved on a linux system via setting LD_PRELOAD
accordingly:
@verbatim
export LD_PRELOAD=<prefix>/lib/SHERPA-MC/libSherpaMain.so
@end verbatim

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/API/ME2-Python/test.py.in
@end smallformat
@end example

@node Matrix Element values through C++ interface
@subsection Computing matrix elements for idividual phase space points using the C++ Interface
@cindex NUMBER_OF_POINTS
@cindex MOMENTA_DATA_FILE

Matrix elements values for user defined phase space points can also be
quarried using a small C++ executable provided in @code{Examples/API/ME2}.
It can be compiled using the provided @code{Makefile}. The test program is
then run typing (note: the @code{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} must be set to include
@code{<Sherpa-installation>/lib/SHERPA-MC})

@verbatim
./test <options>
@end verbatim

where the usual options for Sherpa are passed. An example run card, giving
both the process and the requested phase space points looks like

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/API/ME2-CPP/Run.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Please note that both the process and the beam specifications need to be
present in order for Sherpa to initialise properly. The momenta need to be
given in the proper ordering employed in Sherpa, which can be read from the
process name printed on screen. For each entry the sequence is the following

@verbatim
  <pdg-id> <E> <px> <py> <pz> [triplet-index antitriplet-index]
@end verbatim

with the colour indices ranging from 1..3 for both the triplet and the
antitriplet index in the colour-flow basis. The colour information is only
needed if Comix is used for the calculation as Comix then also gives the
squared matrix element value for this colour cinfiguration. In any case, the
colour-summed value is printed to screen.

Alternatively, the momenta can be given in a separate file specified through
@code{MOMENTA_DATA_FILE=<file>}.

