@node Merging ME and PS
@chapter ME-PS merging

For a large fraction of LHC final states, the application of
reconstruction algorithms leads to the identification of several
hard jets. A major task is to distinguish whether such events are
signals for new physics or just manifestations of SM physics. Related
calculations therefore need to describe as accurately as possible both
the full matrix element for the underlying hard processes as well as
the subsequent evolution and conversion of the hard partons into jets
of hadrons. Several scales determine the evolution of the event. 
This makes it difficult to unambiguously
disentangle the components, which belong to the hard process from
those of the parton evolution. Given an n-jet event of well
separated partons, its jet structure is retained when emitting a
further collinear or soft parton. An additional hard, large-angle
emission however gives rise to an extra jet changing the n to an
n+1 final state. The merging scheme has to define, on an
event-by-event basis, which route is followed. Its
primary goals are to avoid double counting by preventing
events to appear twice, i.e. once for each possibility, as well as
dead regions by generating each configuration only once and using the
appropriate path.

Various such merging schemes have been proposed. The currently most advanced
treatment at tree-level is detailed in @mycite{Hoeche2009rj}. It relies on
a strict separation of the phasespace for additional QCD radiation into
a matrix-element and a parton-shower domain. Truncated showers are then needed
to account for potential radiation in the parton-shower domain, if radiation
in the matrix-element domain has already occured. This technique has been applied 
to the simulation of final states containing hard photons @mycite{Hoeche2009xc} and 
has been extended to multi-scale processes where the leading order is
dominated by very low scales @mycite{Carli2009cg}. A merging approach similar to
@mycite{Hoeche2009rj} was presented in @mycite{Hamilton2009ne} for the special 
case of angular-ordered parton showers.
Several older approaches exist. The CKKW scheme as a procedure similar
to the truncated shower merging was introduced in @mycite{Catani2001cc}.
Its extension to hadronic processes has been discussed in @mycite{Krauss2002up},
and the approach has been validated for several cases @mycite{Schalicke2005nv},
@mycite{Krauss2005re}, @mycite{Krauss2004bs}, @mycite{Krauss2005nu},
@mycite{Gleisberg2005qq}. A reformulation of CKKW to a merging procedure 
in conjunction with a dipole shower (CKKW-L) has been presented in
@mycite{Lonnblad2001iq}, improved in @mycite{Lonnblad2011xx} and @mycite{Lonnblad2012ng}
and extended to the one-loop case in @mycite{Lavesson2008ah} and @mycite{Lonnblad2012ix}. 
The MLM scheme has been developed using a geometric analysis
of the unconstrained radiation pattern in terms of cone jets to generate the inclusive
samples @mycite{Mangano2001xp},@mycite{Mangano2006rw}.
In a number of works, all these different algorithms
have been implemented in different variations on different levels of
sophistication in conjunction with various matrix-element generators
or already in full-fledged event generators. Their respective results have been compared
e.g. in @mycite{Hoche2006ph}, @mycite{Alwall2007fs}. Common to all schemes is
that sequences of tree-level multileg matrix elements with increasing
final-state multiplicity are merged with parton showers to yield a fully
inclusive sample with no double counting. Their connection with truncated 
shower merging is outlined in @mycite{Hoeche2009rj}.

@anchor{The algorithm implemented in Sherpa}
@section The algorithm implemented in Sherpa
In Sherpa the merging of matrix elements and parton showers
is accomplished as follows, cf. @mycite{Hoeche2009rj}:
@enumerate
@item  All cross sections sigma_k for processes with
  k=0,1,...,N extra partons are calculated with the constraint
  that the matrix-element final states pass the jet criteria. They
  are determined by the jet measure shown below, and the minimal distance is set by
  the actual merging scale Q_cut. The measure used for jet identification
  can be written as
@example
  Q_ij^2 = 2p_i.p_j min@{2/(Cijk+Cjik)@}
@end example
  where the minimum is taken over the colour-connected partons k (k different from i and j),
  and where, for final state partons i and j,
@example
  Cijk = p_i.p_k/((p_i+p_k).p_j) - m_i^2/(2p_i.p_j)@ @ @ @ @ @ if j=g,

  Cijk = 1 @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @
@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ else.
@end example


@item  Processes of fixed parton multiplicity are chosen with
  probability sigma_k/(sum of all sigma_k). The event's hard
  process is picked from the list of partonic processes having the
  desired multiplicity and according to their particular cross-section
  contributions. All particle momenta are distributed respecting the
  correlations encoded in the matrix elements. Merged samples
  therefore fully include lepton-jet and jet--jet correlations
  up to N extra jets.
@item  The parton-shower equivalent of the final-state 
  parton configuration of the matrix element is determined
  in order to perform the reweighting. Matrix elements are
  interpreted in the large N_c limit. The final state is
  clustered according to parton-shower branching probabilities 
  and kinematics. The clustering is guided by physically allowed 
  parton combinations, restricting the shower histories to those 
  which correspond to valid Feynman diagrams. It is stopped after 
  a 2->2 configuration (called core process) has been
  identified, or if two subsequent clusterings are unordered in 
  terms of the shower evolution parameter.
@item  A scale for the core process is defined. This step can be
  customized using the keyword @option{CORE_SCALE}, as described in
  @ref{METS scale setting with multiparton core processes}.
@item  The reweighting proceeds according to the reconstructed shower
  history. The event is accepted or rejected according to a 
  kinematics-dependent weight, which corresponds to evaluating
  strong couplings in the parton shower scheme.
@item The parton-shower evolution is started with suitably 
  defined scales for intermediate and final-state particles. 
@item Intermediate partons undergo truncated shower
  evolution. This allows parton-shower emissions between
  the scales of one matrix element branching and the next. 
  This leads to a situation where, due to additional
  partons originating from these branchings, the 
  kinematics of the next matrix-element branching
  needs to be redefined. If for any reason (e.g. 
  energy-momentum conservation) the matrix element 
  branching cannot be reconstructed after a 
  truncated shower branching, this shower branching 
  is vetoed. 
@item  In all circumstances parton-shower radiation is subject to the
  condition that no extra jet is produced. If any emission turns out
  to be harder than the separation cut Q_cut, the event is vetoed. This
  effectively implements a Sudakov rejection and reduces the individual
  inclusive cross section to exclusive ones. The
  exception to this veto -- called highest-multiplicity treatment --
  is for matrix-element configurations with the maximal number N
  of extra partons. These cases require the parton shower to cover the
  phase space for more jets than those produced by the matrix
  elements. To obtain an inclusive N-jet prediction, the veto
  therefore is on parton emissions at scales harder than the softest
  parton-shower scale, which can produce allowed emissions harder
  than the separation scale Q_cut. Of course,
  correlations including the N+1th jet are only approximately taken
  into account.
@end enumerate


@section Generation of merged samples

The generation of inclusive event samples, i.e. the combination of
matrix elements for different parton multiplicities with parton
showers and hadronization, is completely automatized within Sherpa. 
To obtain consistent results, certain parameters related to the
matrix-element calculation and the parton showers have to be set
accordingly. In the following the basic parameter settings for
generating ``merged'' samples are summarised. Potential pitfalls are
pointed out.
@enumerate
@item @strong{Process setup}

   The starting point is the definition of a basic core
  (lowest-order) process with respect to which the impact of
  additional QCD radiation shall be studied. As an illustrative
  example, consider Drell--Yan lepton-pair production in proton--proton
  collisions. The lowest-order process reads pp -> l-bar l, mediated
  through Z/photon exchange. Additional QCD radiation will then
  manifest itself through additional QCD partons in the final state,
  i.e. pp -> l\bar l + n jets with n=1,...,N. To initialise
  the calculation of all the different matrix elements (for pp ->
  l\bar l+0,1,...,N QCD partons) in a single generator run,
  besides selecting the basic core process, the maximal number N
  of additional final-state QCD partons has to be specified in the
  @code{(processes)} section of the steering file. For the above example,
  assuming N=3, this reads:
@verbatim
    Process 93 93 -> 90 90 93{3}
    Order_EW 2
@end verbatim
  N is given in the curly brackets belonging to the @code{93}, the
  code for QCD partons. Note, that it is mandatory to fix the order of
  electroweak couplings to the corresponding order of the basic core
  process, here pp -> l-bar l or @code{93 93 -> 90 90}, as only QCD
  corrections to this process can be considered and further
  electroweak corrections are not treated by Sherpa's ME-PS merging
  implementation.
  
@item @strong{Setting the merging scale}

  The most important parameter to be specified when generating
  merged samples with Sherpa is the actual value of the jet
  resolution that separates the subsamples of different parton
  multiplicities, the merging scale. 
  
  The jet criterion is explained in 
  @ref{The algorithm implemented in Sherpa}. The separation cut, Q_cut, 
  must be specified. It is set using the @ref{CKKW} tag, usually in the form
  (Q_cut/E_cms)^2. For example, a valid setting reads
@verbatim
    CKKW sqr(20/E_CMS)
@end verbatim
  and must be included in the process specification, before the 
  @code{End process} line. As mentioned before,
  all extra QCD parton radiation is regularised by satisfying the
  jet criterion. However, divergences of the basic core process, such as
  vanishing invariant masses of lepton pairs, need to be regularised
  by imposing additional cuts, see @ref{Selectors}.
  
@item @strong{Parton showering}

  The parton shower must always be enabled.
@end enumerate

@strong{Further remarks}

Although the merging of different multiplicity matrix-element samples
with parton showers attached is automatized, some
care has to be taken to ensure physical meaningful results. Some of
the most prominent mistakes are listed here:
@itemize @bullet
@item  The jet criterion specified by the @ref{CKKW} 
  parameter defines which phase-space regions are
  populated by matrix elements and which ones by parton showers. In
  order to guarantee functioning of Sherpa's ME-PS merging implementation, no
  further phase-space cuts on the additional QCD parton emissions
  can be applied while generating the samples.
@item  When jets are included in the core process, like in the 
  @ref{LHC_Jets_MEPS} example, a jet criterion must be specified 
  for these jets. This can be done using the @code{NJetFinder}
  parameter, which applies it's jet criterion to only the specified 
  number of jets. See the @ref{Examples} section for an example of the usage.
@item  Cross-sections of parton-level calculations with Sherpa 
  can be stored and re-used in later runs. The same applies to the
  cross sections sigma_k (cf. the first item in
  @ref{The algorithm implemented in Sherpa}) 
  of the various matrix-element multiplicities.
  For the merging algorithm to work correctly, the re-evaluation of
  these cross sections is however mandatory and stored integration
  results of former runs will not be valid whenever related parameters
  are changed. This includes all parameters given in the @code{(selector)}
  part of the steering file, or the merging scale set by @ref{CKKW}.
  Furthermore, changing the centre-of-mass energy, the choice of the
  PDF or the running of alpha_s requires a fresh integration.
@item  The total inclusive cross section of a merged Sherpa prediction
  does not correspond to the sum of the sigma_k. Because of
  reweighting with Sudakov form factors on an event-by-event basis, 
  all these fixed-multiplicity cross
  sections are modified (scaled down) by the ME-PS merging procedure. The sum
  of the modified values determines Sherpa's total inclusive cross
  section, which is given in the final output after event generation, see
  @ref{Running Sherpa}.
@item  The ME-PS merging implemented in Sherpa is not yet enabled for
  processes involving coloured supersymmetric particles.
@end itemize

