@node Minimum Bias
@section Minimum bias events

Minimum bias events are simulated through the Shrimps module in Sherpa.

@subsection Physics of Shrimps

@subsubsection Inclusive part of the model

Shrimps is based on the KMR model @mycite{Ryskin2009tj}, which is a
multi-channel eikonal model. The
incoming hadrons are written as a superposition of Good-Walker states, which are
diffractive eigenstates that diagalonise the T-matrix. This allows to include
low-mass diffractive excitation. Each combination of colliding Good-Walker
states gives rise to a single-channel eikonal. The final eikonal is the
superposition of the single-channel eikonals. The number of Good-Walker states
is 2 in Shrimps (the original KMR model includes 3 states).

Each single-channel eikonal can be seen as the product of two parton densities,
one from each of the colliding Good-Walker states. The evolution of the parton
densities in rapidity due to extra emissions and absoption on either of the two
hadrons is described by a set of coupled differential equations. The parameter
@code{Delta}, which can be interpreted as the Pomeron intercept, is the
probability for emitting an extra parton per unit of rapidity. The strength of
absorptive corrections is quantified by the parameter @code{lambda}, which can
also be seen as the triple-Pomeron coupling. A small region of size
@code{deltaY} around the beams is excluded from the evolution due to the finite
longitudinal size of the parton densities.

The boundary conditions for the parton densities are form factors, which have a 
dipole form characterised by the parameters @code{Lambda2}, @code{beta_0^2},
@code{kappa} and @code{xi}.

In this framework the eikonals and the cross sections for the different modes
(elastic, inelastic, single- and double-diffractive) are calculated. 

@subsubsection Exclusive part of the model

Inelastic events are generated by explicitely simulating the exchange and
rescattering of gluon ladders. The number of primary ladders is given by a
Poisson distribution whose parameter is the single-channel eikonal. The
decomposition of the incoming hadrons into partons proceeds via suitably
infra-red continued PDFs. 

The emissions from the ladders are then generated in
a Markov chain. The pseudo-Sudakov form factor contains several factors: an
ordinary gluon emission term, a factor accounting for the Reggeisation of the
gluons and a recombination weight taking absorptive corrections into account.
The emission term has the perturbative form @math{alpha_s(k_T^2)/k_T^2}, that
needs to
be continued into the infra-red region. In the case of @math{alpha_s} the
transition into the infra-red region happens at @code{Q_as^2} while in the case
of @math{1/k_T^2} the transition scale is generated dynamically and depends on
the parton densities and is scaled by @code{Q_0^2}. 

The propagators of the filled ladder can be either in a colour singlet or octet
state, the probabilities are again given through the parton densities. The
probability for a singlet can also be regulated by hand through the parameter
@code{Chi_S}. A singlet propagator is the result of an implicit rescattering. 

After all emissions have been generated and the colours assigned, further
radiation is generated by the parton shower to resum also the logrithms in
@math{1/Q^2}. The amount of radiation from the parton shower can be regulated
with @code{KT2_Factor}, which  multiplies the shower starting scale. After
parton showering partons emitted from the ladder or the parton shower are
subject to explicit rescattering, i.e. they can exchange secondary ladders. The
probability for the exchange of a rescattering ladder is characterised by
@code{RescProb}. The probability for rescattering over a singlet propagator
receives an extra factor @code{RescProb1}. After all ladder exchanges and
rescatterings but before hadronsation colour can be re-arrangd in the event.
Finally, the event is hadronised using the standard Sherpa cluster
hadronisation.

@subsection Parameters and settings

Below is a list of all relevant parameters to steer the Shrimps module.

@subsubsection Generating minimum bias events
@cindex EVENT_TYPE
@cindex SOFT_COLLISIONS

To generate minimum bias events with Shrimps in the '(run)' section of the run
card @code{EVENT_TYPE} has to be set to @code{MinimumBias} and
@code{SOFT_COLLISIONS} to @code{Shrimps}.

@subsubsection Shrimps Mode
@cindex Shrimps_Mode

The setup of minimum bias events and other, related simulations, is 
covered by the '(run)' section of the run card.  The exact choice is steered
through the parameter @code{Shrimps_Mode} (default @code{Inelastic}),
which allows the following settings:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{Xsecs}, which will only calculate total, elastic, inelastic,
      single- and double-diffractive cross sections at various relevant energies
      and write them to a file, typically 'InclusiveQuantities/Xsecs.dat';
@item @code{Elastic}
      generates elastic events at a fixed energy;
@item @code{Single-diffractive}
      generates low-mass single-diffractive events at a fixed energy, 
      modelled by the transition of one of the protons to a N(1440) state;
@item @code{Double-diffractive}
      generates low-mass single-diffractive events at a fixed energy, 
      modelled by the transition of both protons to N(1440) states;
@item @code{Quasi-elastic}
      generates a combination of elastic, single- and double-diffractive
      events in due proportion;
@item @code{Inelastic}
      generates inelastic minimum bias events through the exchange of t-channel
      gluons or singlets (pomerons).  This mode actually will include
      large mass diffraction;
@item @code{All}
      generates a combination of quasi-elastic and inelastic events in due 
      proportion.
@end itemize

@subsubsection Parameters of the eikonals
@cindex Lambda2
@cindex beta_0^2
@cindex kappa
@cindex xi
@cindex deltaY
@cindex lambda
@cindex Delta

The parameters of the differential equations for the parton densities are

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{Delta} (default 0.4): perturbative Pomeron intercept
@item @code{lambda} (default 0.3): triple Pomeron coupling
@item @code{deltaY} (default 1.5): rapidity interval excluded from evolution
@end itemize

The form factors are of the form @*
 @math{F_{1/2}(q_T) = beta_0^2 (1 +/- kappa)
exp[-xi (1 +/- kappa)q_T^2/Lambda^2]/[1 + (1 +/- kappa)q_T^2/Lambda^2]^2} @*
with the parameters

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{Lambda2} (default @math{1.7 GeV^2})
@item @code{beta_0^2} (default 20.0 mb)
@item @code{kappa} (default 0.6)
@item @code{xi} (default 0.2)
@end itemize

@subsubsection Parameters for event generation
@cindex Q_0^2
@cindex Q_as^2
@cindex Chi_S
@cindex Shower_Min_KT2
@cindex KT2_Factor
@cindex RescProb
@cindex RescProb1
@cindex Resc_KTMin
@cindex ReconnProb
@cindex Q_RC^2

The parameters related to the generation of inelastic events are

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{Q_0^2} (default @math{0.58 GeV^2}): factor scaling the infra-red
scale of ladder emissions
@item @code{Q_as^2} (default @math{1.0 GeV^2}): infra-red scale of the strong
coupling
@item @code{Chi_S} (default 0.60): factor scaling probability for singlet
propagators in ladders
@item @code{Shower_Min_KT2} (default 2.0 GeV^2): minimum shower starting scale
@item @code{KT2_Factor} (default 0.89): factor scaling the parton shower starting
scale
@item @code{RescProb} (default 5.0): parameter controlling probability for
rescattering
@item @code{RescProb1} (default 0.54): factor scaling rescatter
probility over singlet propagators
@item @code{Resc_KTMin} (default 'off'): require minimum kt in rescattering (switch)
@item @code{ReconnProb} (default -15.0): parameter regulating the strength of colour reconnections (logarithmic)
@item @code{Q_RC^2} (default 0.72 GeV^2): regulator entering distance measure in colour reconnections
@end itemize
