@node Model Parameters
@section Model parameters
@cindex SHOW_MODEL_SYNTAX
@cindex MODEL
@cindex MASS[<id>]
@cindex MASSIVE[<id>]
@cindex WIDTH[<id>]
@cindex ACTIVE[<id>]
@cindex STABLE[<id>]
@cindex YUKAWA[<id>]

The interaction model setup is covered by the @code{(model)} section of
the steering file or the model data file @code{Model.dat}, respectively.

The main switch here is called @code{MODEL} and sets the model that Sherpa uses
throughout the simulation run. The default is @option{SM}, for
the Standard Model. For a complete list of available models, 
run Sherpa with @kbd{SHOW_MODEL_SYNTAX=1} on the command line.
This will display not only the available models, but also the
parameters for those models. 

The chosen model also defines the list of particles and their default
properties. With the following switches it is possible to change 
the properties of all fundamental particles:

@table @code
@item MASS[<id>]
Sets the mass (in GeV) of the particle with PDG id @option{<id>}.
@*
Masses of particles and corresponding anti-particles are always set
simultaneously.
@*
For particles with Yukawa couplings, those are enabled/disabled consistent with the
mass (taking into account the MASSIVE flag) by default, but that can be modified
using the @option{YUKAWA[<id>]} parameter. Note that by default the Yukawa
couplings are treated as running, cf. @ref{YUKAWA_MASSES}.

@item MASSIVE[<id>]
Specifies whether the finite mass of particle with PDG id @option{<id>}
is to be considered in matrix-element calculations or not.

@item WIDTH[<id>]
Sets the width (in GeV) of the particle with PDG id @option{<id>}.

@item ACTIVE[<id>]
Enables/disables the particle with PDG id @option{<id>}.

@item STABLE[<id>]
Sets the particle with PDG id @option{<id>} either stable or unstable according
to the following options:
@table @option
@item 0
Particle and anti-particle are unstable
@item 1
Particle and anti-particle are stable
@item 2
Particle is stable, anti-particle is unstable
@item 3
Particle is unstable, anti-particle is stable
@end table
This option applies to decays of hadrons (cf. @ref{Hadron decays}) as well
as particles produced in the hard scattering (cf. @ref{Hard decays}).
For the latter, alternatively the decays can be specified explicitly in the
process setup (see @ref{Processes}) to avoid the narrow-width approximation.

@item PRIORITY[<id>]
Allows to overwrite the default automatic flavour sorting in a process by specifying a priority for the given flavour. This way one can identify certain particles which are part of a container (e.g. massless b-quarks), such that their position can be used reliably in selectors and scale setters.

@end table

Note: To set properties of hadrons, you can use the same switches (except for
@code{MASSIVE}) in the fragmentation section, see @ref{Hadronization}.

@anchor{Models available in Sherpa}
@menu
* SM::		   Standard Model
* MSSM::	   Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
* ADD::		   ADD Model of Large Extra Dimensions
* AGC::		   Anomalous Gauge Couplings
* THDM::	   Two Higgs Doublet Model
* EHC::		   Effective Higgs Couplings
* 4thGen::	   Fourth Generation
* FeynRules::	   FeynRules model 
@end menu



@include SM.texi
@include MSSM.texi
@include ADD.texi
@include AGC.texi
@include THDM.texi
@include EHC.texi
@include 4thGen.texi
@include FeynRules.texi
