@node Exotic physics
@section Exotic physics

It is possible to add your own models to Sherpa in a straightforward way. 
To illustrate, a simple example has been included in the directory 
@code{Examples/Models/SM_ZPrime}, showing how to add a Z-prime boson to 
the Standard Model.

The important features of this example include:
@itemize @bullet
@item The @code{SM_Zprime.C} file. 

      This file contains the initialisation of the Z-prime boson. The 
      properties of the Z-prime are set here, such as mass, width, 
      electromagnetic charge, spin etc.
      
@item The @code{Interaction_Model_SM_Zprime.C} file. 

      This file contains the definition of the Z-prime boson's interactions. 
      The right- and left-handed couplings to each of the fermions are 
      set here.

@item An example @code{Makefile}.

      This shows how to compile the sources above into a shared library.
      
@item The line @code{SHERPA_LDADD SMZprime} in the run-card.

      This line tells Sherpa to load the extra libraries created from the *.C 
      files above.
      
@item The line @code{MODEL SM+Zprime} in the run-card.

      This line tells Sherpa which model to use for the run.

@item The lines @code{MASS[32] 1000.} and @code{WIDTH[32] 50.} in the run-card.

      These lines show how you can overrule the choices you made for the 
      properties of the new particle in the @code{SM_Zprime.C} file. For 
      more information on changing parameters in Sherpa, see 
      @ref{Input structure} and @ref{Parameters}.

@item The lines @code{Zp_cpl_L 0.3} and @code{Zp_cpl_R 0.6} set the
      couplings to left and right handed fermions in the run-card.

@end itemize

To use this model, create the libraries for Sherpa to use by running

@example
make
@end example

in this directory. Then run Sherpa as normal:

@example
../../../bin/Sherpa
@end example 

To implement your own model, copy these example files anywhere and modify 
them according to your needs.

Note: You don't have to modify or recompile any part of Sherpa to use your
model. As long as the @code{SHERPA_LDADD} parameter is specified as above,
Sherpa will pick up your model automatically.

Furthermore note: New physics models with an existing implementation in
FeynRules, cf. @mycite{Christensen2008py} and
@mycite{Christensen2009jx}, can directly be invoked using Sherpa's
support for the UFO model format, see @ref{UFO Model Interface}.


