@node NTuple production
@subsection Production of NTuples
Root NTuples are a convenient way to store the result of cumbersome 
fixed-order calculations in order to perform multiple analyses. 
This example shows how to generate such NTuples and reweighted them 
in order to change factorisation and renormalisation scales. 
Note that in order to use this setup, Sherpa must be configured 
with option @code{--enable-root=/path/to/root}, see @ref{Event output formats}. 
If Sherpa has not been configured with Rivet analysis support, 
please disable the analysis using @option{-a0} on the command line, 
see @ref{Command line}.

When using NTuples, one needs to bear in mind that every calculation
involving jets in the final state is exclusive in the sense that a lower
cutoff on the jet transverse momenta must be imposed.
It is therefore necessary to check whether the event sample stored in the
NTuple is sufficiently inclusive before using it. Similar remarks apply
when photons are present in the NLO calculation or when cuts on
leptons have been applied at generation level to increase efficiency.
Every NTuple should therefore be accompanied by an appropriate documentation.

This example will generate NTuples for the process pp->lvj,
where l is an electron or positron, and v is an electron (anti-)neutrino.
We identify parton-level jets using the anti-k_T algorithm with R=0.4 
@mycite{Cacciari2008gp}. We require the transverse momentum of these jets 
to be larger than 20 GeV. No other cuts are applied at generation level.

@example
@smallformat
@verbatiminclude Examples/FixedOrder_NLO/NTuples/Run.B-like.dat
@end smallformat
@end example

Things to notice:
@itemize
@item NTuple production is enabled by @option{EVENT_OUTPUT Root[NTuple_B-like]},
  see @ref{Event output formats}.
@item The scale used is defined as in @mycite{Berger2009ep}.
@item @option{EW_SCHEME 0; WIDTH_SCHEME Fixed;} are used to set
  the value of the weak mixing angle to 0.23, 
  consistent with EW precision measurements.
@item @option{DIPOLE_ALPHA 0.03} is used to limit the active phase space of
  dipole subtractions.
@item @option{MASSIVE[13] 1; MASSIVE[15] 1;} are used to limit the number of
  active lepton flavours to electron and positron.
@item The option @option{USE_HEPMC_SHORT 1} is used in the Rivet analysis
  section as the events produced by Sherpa are not at particle level.
@end itemize

@subsubsection NTuple production
Start Sherpa using the command line
@verbatim
  Sherpa -f Run.B-like.dat
@end verbatim
Sherpa will first create source code for its matrix-element calculations.
This process will stop with a message instructing you to compile. 
Do so by running
@verbatim
  ./makelibs -j4
@end verbatim
Launch Sherpa again, using
@verbatim
  Sherpa -f Run.B-like.dat
@end verbatim
Sherpa will then compute the Born, virtual and integrated subtraction contribution
to the NLO cross section and generate events. These events are analyzed using the 
Rivet library and stored in a Root NTuple file called @kbd{NTuple_B-like.root}. 
We will use this NTuple later to compute an NLO uncertainty band.

The real-emission contribution, including subtraction terms, to the NLO cross section
is computed using
@verbatim
  Sherpa -f Run.R-like.dat
@end verbatim
Events are generated, analyzed by Rivet and stored in the Root NTuple file
@kbd{NTuple_R-like.root}.

The two analyses of events with Born-like and real-emission-like kinematics
need to be merged, which can be achieved using scripts like @kbd{aidaadd}.
The result can then be plotted and displayed.

@subsubsection Usage of NTuples in Sherpa
Next we will compute the NLO uncertainty band using Sherpa.
To this end, we make use of the Root NTuples generated in the previous steps.
Note that the setup files for reweighting are almost identical to those for
generating the NTuples. We have simply replaced @option{EVENT_OUTPUT} by
@option{EVENT_INPUT}.

First we re-evaluate the events with the scale increased by a factor 2:
@verbatim
  Sherpa -f Reweight.B-like.dat
  Sherpa -f Reweight.R-like.dat
@end verbatim
Then we re-evaluate the events with the scale decreased by a factor 2:
@verbatim
  Sherpa -f Reweight.B-like.dat SCF:=0.25 -A Analysis/025HTp/BVI
  Sherpa -f Reweight.R-like.dat SCF:=0.25 -A Analysis/025HTp/RS
@end verbatim
The two contributions can again be combined using @kbd{aidaadd}.
