@node Run Parameters
@section Run parameters

The following parameters describe general run information. They may be set in the @code{(run)} section of the run-card, see @ref{Input structure}.

@menu
* EVENTS::            Number of events to generate.
* EVENT_TYPE::        Type of events to generate.
* SHERPA_VERSION::    Sherpa version that can run this run card.
* TUNE::              Parameter tunes.
* OUTPUT::            Screen output level.
* LOG_FILE::          Log file.
* RANDOM_SEED::       Seed for random number generator.
* EVENT_SEED_MODE::   Setting predefined seeds.
* ANALYSIS::          Switch internal analysis on or off.
* ANALYSIS_OUTPUT::   Directory for generated analysis histogram files.
* TIMEOUT::           Run time limitation.
* RLIMIT_AS::         Memory limitation and leak detection.
* BATCH_MODE::        Batch mode settings.
* NUM_ACCURACY::      Accuracy for gauge tests.

* SHERPA_CPP_PATH::   The C++ code generation path.
* SHERPA_LIB_PATH::   The runtime library path.

* Event output formats::     Event output in different formats.
* Scale and PDF variations:: On-the-fly scale and PDF variations.
* MPI parallelization::      MPI parallelization with Sherpa.
@end menu


@node EVENTS
@subsection EVENTS
@cindex EVENTS
This parameter specifies the number of events to be generated.
@*
It can alternatively be set on the command line through option
@option{-e}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node EVENT_TYPE
@subsection EVENT_TYPE
@cindex EVENT_TYPE
This parameter specifies the kind of events to be generated.  
It can alternatively be set on the command line through option
@option{-t}, see @ref{Command line}.
@itemize @bullet
@item
        The default event type is @code{StandardPerturbative}, which will 
        generate a hard event through exact matrix elements matched and/or 
        merged with the paerton shower, eventually including hadronization, 
        hadron decays, etc..
@end itemize
Alternatively there are two more specialised modes, namely:
@itemize @bullet
@item
        @code{MinimumBias}, which generates minimum bias events through the
        SHRIMPS model implemented in Sherpa, see @ref{Minimum Bias}
@item
        @code{HadronDecay}, which allows to simulate the decays of a specific
        hadron.          
@end itemize

@node SHERPA_VERSION
@subsection SHERPA_VERSION
@cindex SHERPA_VERSION
This parameter ties a run card to a specific Sherpa version, e.g.
@code{2.2.0}. If two parameters are given they are interpreted as
a range of Sherpa versions.

@node TUNE
@subsection TUNE
@cindex TUNE
This parameter specifies which tune is to be used. Setting different 
tunes using this parameter ensures, that consistent settings are 
employed. This affects mostly @ref{MPI Parameters} and
@ref{Intrinsic Transverse Momentum} parameters. Possible values are:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{CT10} MPI tune for the Sherpa's default PDF, CT10. This is the default tune.
@item
@code{CT10_UEup} Upward variation of MPI activity, variation of the CT10 tune to 
assess MPI uncertainties.
@item
@code{CT10_UEdown} Downward variation of MPI activity, variation of the CT10 tune to 
assess MPI uncertainties.
@end itemize

@node OUTPUT
@subsection OUTPUT
@cindex OUTPUT
@cindex EVT_OUTPUT
This parameter specifies the screen output level (verbosity) of the program.
If you are looking for event file output options please refer to section
@ref{Event output formats}.
@*
It can alternatively be set on the command line through option
@option{-O}, see @ref{Command line}. A different output level can be 
specified for the event generation step through @option{EVT_OUTPUT}
or command line option @option{-o}, see @ref{Command line}

The value can be any sum of the following:
@itemize @bullet
@item
0: Error messages (-> always displayed).
@item
1: Event display.
@item
2: Informational messages during the run.
@item
4: Tracking messages (lots of output).
@item
8: Debugging messages (even more output).
@end itemize

E.g. @option{OUTPUT=3} would display information, events and errors.

@node LOG_FILE
@subsection LOG_FILE
@cindex LOG_FILE
This parameter specifies the log file. If set, the standard output 
from Sherpa is written to the specified file, but output from child
processes is not redirected. This option is particularly useful to produce
clean log files when running the code in MPI mode, see @ref{MPI parallelization}.
A file name can alternatively be specified on the command line through option
@option{-l}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node RANDOM_SEED
@subsection RANDOM_SEED
@cindex RANDOM_SEED
Sherpa uses different random-number generators. The default is the Ran3 
generator described in [@uref{http://www.nr.com/,,ISBN-10:0521880688}].
Alternatively, a combination of George Marsaglias KISS and SWB 
[@uref{http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/aoap/1177005878,,Ann.Appl.Probab.1,3(1991)462}]
can be employed, see @uref{http://groups.google.co.uk/group/sci.stat.math/msg/edcb117233979602,,this} 
@uref{http://groups.google.co.uk/group/sci.math.num-analysis/msg/eb4ddde782b17051,,website}.
The integer-valued seeds of the generators are specified by 
@option{RANDOM_SEED=A .. D}. They can also be set directly using 
@option{RANDOM_SEED1=A} through @option{RANDOM_SEED4=D}. The Ran3 generator 
takes only one argument. This value can also be set using the command line 
option @option{-R}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node EVENT_SEED_MODE
@subsection EVENT_SEED_MODE
The tag @option{EVENT_SEED_MODE} can be used to enforce the same seeds in different
runs of the generator. When set to 1, seed files are written to disk. These files are
gzip compressed, if Sherpa was compiled with option @option{--enable-gzip}.
When set to 2, existing random seed files are read and the seed is set to the
next available value in the file before each event. When set to 3, Sherpa uses
an internal bookkeeping mechanism to advance to the next predefined seed.
No seed files are written out or read in.

@node ANALYSIS
@subsection ANALYSIS
@cindex ANALYSIS
Analysis routines can be switched on or off by setting the ANALYSIS flag.
The default is no analysis, corresponding to option @option{0}.
This parameter can also be specified on the command line using option
@option{-a}, see @ref{Command line}.

The following analysis handlers are currently available
@table @option
@item Internal
Sherpa's internal analysis handler.
@*
To use this option, the package must be configured with option @option{--enable-analysis}.
@*
An output directory can be specified using @ref{ANALYSIS_OUTPUT}.
@item Rivet
The Rivet package, see @uref{http://projects.hepforge.org/rivet/,,Rivet Website}.
@*
To enable it, Rivet and HepMC have to be installed and Sherpa must be configured
as described in @ref{Rivet analyses}.
@item HZTool
The HZTool package, see @uref{http://hztool.hepforge.org/,,HZTool Website}.
@*
To enable it, HZTool and CERNLIB have to be installed and Sherpa must be configured
as described in @ref{HZTool analyses}.
@end table

Multiple options can be combined using a comma, e.g. @samp{ANALYSIS=Internal,Rivet}.

@node ANALYSIS_OUTPUT
@subsection ANALYSIS_OUTPUT
@cindex ANALYSIS_OUTPUT
Name of the directory for histogram files when using the internal analysis
and name of the Aida file when using Rivet, see @ref{ANALYSIS}. 
The directory / file will be created w.r.t. the working directory. The default
value is @option{Analysis/}. This parameter can also be specified on the 
command line using option @option{-A}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node TIMEOUT
@subsection TIMEOUT
@cindex TIMEOUT
A run time limitation can be given in user CPU seconds through TIMEOUT. This option is of
some relevance when running SHERPA on a batch system. Since in many cases jobs are just
terminated, this allows to interrupt a run, to store all relevant information and to restart
it without any loss. This is particularly useful when carrying out long integrations.
Alternatively, setting the TIMEOUT variable to -1, which is the default setting, translates into
having no run time limitation at all. The unit is seconds.

@node RLIMIT_AS
@subsection RLIMIT_AS
@cindex RLIMIT_AS
@cindex RLIMIT_BY_CPU
@cindex MEMLEAK_WARNING_THRESHOLD
A memory limitation can be given to prevent Sherpa to crash the system it is 
running on as it continues to build up matrix elements and loads additional 
libraries at run time. Per default the maximum RAM of the system is determined 
and set as the memory limit. This can be changed by giving 
@option{RLIMIT_AS=<size>} where the size is given in the format @code{500 MB}, 
@code{4 GB}, or @code{10 %}. The space between number and unit is mandatory. 
When running with @ref{MPI parallelization} it might be necessary to divide 
the total maximum by the number of cores. This can be done by setting 
@code{RLIMIT_BY_CPU=1}.

Sherpa checks for memory leaks during integration and event generation. 
If the allocated memory after start of integration or event generation exceeds
the parameter @option{MEMLEAK_WARNING_THRESHOLD}, a warning is printed. 
Like @option{RLIMIT_AS}, @option{MEMLEAK_WARNING_THRESHOLD} can be set 
using units. However, no spaces are allowed between the number and the unit.
The warning threshold defaults to @code{16MB}.

@node BATCH_MODE
@subsection BATCH_MODE
@cindex BATCH_MODE
@cindex EVENT_DISPLAY_INTERVAL
Whether or not to run Sherpa in batch mode. The default is @option{1}, 
meaning Sherpa does not attempt to save runtime information when catching 
a signal or an exception. On the contrary, if option @option{0} is used, 
Sherpa will store potential integration information and analysis results, 
once the run is terminated abnormally. All possible settings are:
@itemize
@item @var{0} Sherpa attempts to write out integration and analysis 
results when catching an exception.
@item @var{1} Sherpa does not attempt to write out integration and 
analysis results when catching an exception.
@item @var{2} Sherpa outputs the event counter continously, instead 
of overwriting the previous one (default when using @ref{LOG_FILE}).
@item @var{4} Sherpa increases the on-screen event counter in constant 
steps of 100 instead of an increase relative to the current event 
number. The interval length can be adjusted with @code{EVENT_DISPLAY_INTERVAL}.
@end itemize
The settings are additive such that multiple settings can be employed 
at the same time.

@emph{Note that when running the code on a cluster or in a grid environment, BATCH_MODE should always contain setting 1 (i.e. BATCH_MODE=[1|3|5|7]).}

The command line option @option{-b} should therefore not be used in this case, see
@ref{Command line}.

@node NUM_ACCURACY
@subsection NUM_ACCURACY
@cindex NUM_ACCURACY
The targeted numerical accuracy can be specified through NUM ACCURACY, e.g. for comparing
two numbers. This might have to be reduced if gauge tests fail for numerical reasons.

@node SHERPA_CPP_PATH
@subsection SHERPA_CPP_PATH
@cindex SHERPA_CPP_PATH
The path in which Sherpa will eventually store dynamically created C++ source code.
If not specified otherwise, sets @option{SHERPA_LIB_PATH} to 
@samp{$SHERPA_CPP_PATH/Process/lib}. This value can also be set using the command line 
option @option{-L}, see @ref{Command line}.

@node SHERPA_LIB_PATH
@subsection SHERPA_LIB_PATH
@cindex SHERPA_LIB_PATH
The path in which Sherpa looks for dynamically linked libraries from previously created
C++ source code, cf. @ref{SHERPA_CPP_PATH}.


@node Event output formats
@subsection Event output formats
@cindex HepMC_GenEvent
@cindex HepMC_Short
@cindex HEPEVT
@cindex LHEF
@cindex Root
@cindex Delphes
@cindex FILE_SIZE
@cindex EVT_FILE_PATH
@cindex OUTPUT_PRECISION
@cindex EVENT_OUTPUT
@cindex EVENT_INPUT

Sherpa provides the possibility to output events in various formats, 
e.g. the HepEVT common block structure or the HepMC format.
The authors of Sherpa assume that the user is sufficiently acquainted with 
these formats when selecting them.

If the events are to be written to file, the parameter @option{EVENT_OUTPUT}
must be specified together with a file name. An example would be
@code{EVENT_OUTPUT=HepMC_GenEvent[MyFile]}, where @code{MyFile} stands
for the desired file base name. The following formats are currently available:

@table @option
@item HepMC_GenEvent
Generates output in HepMC::IO_GenEvent format. The HepMC::GenEvent::m_weights 
weight vector stores the following items: @code{[0]} event weight, @code{[1]} 
combined matrix element and PDF weight (missing only phase space weight
information, thus directly suitable for evaluating the matrix element value of
the given configuration), @code{[2]} event weight
normalisation (in case of unweighted events event weights of ~ +/-1 
can be obtained by (event weight)/(event weight normalisation)), and 
@code{[3]} number of trials. The total cross section of the simulated event sample
can be computed as the sum of event weights divided by the sum of the number of trials.
This value must agree with the total cross section quoted by Sherpa at the end of
the event generation run, and it can serve as a cross-check on the consistency
of the HepMC event file.  Note that Sherpa conforms to the Les Houches 2013
suggestion (@url{http://phystev.in2p3.fr/wiki/2013:groups:tools:hepmc}) 
of indicating interaction types through the GenVertex type-flag.  Multiple
event weights can also be enabled with HepMC versions >2.06, cf. 
@ref{Scale and PDF variations}. The following additional customisations 
can be used

@code{HEPMC_USE_NAMED_WEIGHTS=<0|1>} 
Enable filling weights with an associated name. The nominal event weight 
has the key @code{Weight}. @code{MEWeight}, @code{WeightNormalisation} and 
@code{NTrials} provide additional information for each event as described 
above. Needs HepMC version >2.06.

@code{HEPMC_EXTENDED_WEIGHTS=<0|1>}
Write additional event weight information needed for a posteriori reweighting 
into the WeightContainer, cf. @ref{A posteriori scale and PDF variations using the HepMC GenEvent Output}. Necessitates 
the use of @code{HEPMC_USE_NAMED_WEIGHTS}.

@code{HEPMC_TREE_LIKE=<0|1>}
Force the event record to be stricly tree-like. Please note that this removes 
some information from the matrix-element-parton-shower interplay which would 
be otherwise stored.

@item HepMC_Short
Generates output in HepMC::IO_GenEvent format, however, only incoming beams and 
outgoing particles are stored. Intermediate and decayed particles are not 
listed. The event weights stored as the same as above, and 
@code{HEPMC_USE_NAMED_WEIGHTS} and @code{HEPMC_EXTENDED_WEIGHTS} can be used to 
customise.
@item Delphes_GenEvent
Generates output in @url{http://root.cern.ch,,Root} format, which can be passed to
@uref{http://cp3.irmp.ucl.ac.be/projects/delphes,,Delphes} for analyses.
Input events are taken from the HepMC interface. Storage space can be reduced
by up to 50% compared to gzip compressed HepMC. This output format is available 
only if Sherpa was configured and installed with options @option{--enable-root} 
and @option{--enable-delphes=/path/to/delphes}.
@item Delphes_Short
Generates output in @url{http://root.cern.ch,,Root} format, which can be passed to
@uref{http://cp3.irmp.ucl.ac.be/projects/delphes,,Delphes} for analyses.
Only incoming beams and outgoing particles are stored.
@item PGS
Generates output in @url{http://cepa.fnal.gov/psm/stdhep,,StdHEP} format, which can be 
passed to @uref{http://www.physics.ucdavis.edu/~conway/research/software/pgs/pgs4-general.htm,,PGS} 
for analyses. This output format is available only if Sherpa was configured and installed 
with options @option{--enable-hepevtsize=4000} and @option{--enable-pgs=/path/to/pgs}.
Please refer to the PGS documentation for how to pass StdHEP event files on to PGS.
If you are using the LHC olympics executeable, you may run
@option{./olympics --stdhep events.lhe <other options>}.

@item PGS_Weighted
Generates output in @url{http://cepa.fnal.gov/psm/stdhep,,StdHEP} format, which can be 
passed to @uref{http://www.physics.ucdavis.edu/~conway/research/software/pgs/pgs4-general.htm,,PGS} 
for analyses. Event weights in the HEPEV4 common block are stored in the event file.
@item HEPEVT
Generates output in HepEvt format.
@item LHEF
Generates output in Les Houches Event File format. This output format is 
intended for output of @strong{matrix element configurations only}. Since the 
format requires PDF information to be written out in the outdated 
PDFLIB/LHAGLUE enumeration format this is only available automatically if 
LHAPDF is used, the identification numbers otherwise have to be given 
explicitly via @code{LHEF_PDF_NUMBER} (@code{LHEF_PDF_NUMBER_1} and 
@code{LHEF_PDF_NUMBER_2} if both beams carry different structure functions). 
This format currently outputs matrix element information only, no information 
about the large-Nc colour flow is given as the LHEF output format is not 
suited to communicate enough information for meaningful parton showering 
on top of multiparton final states.
@item Root
Generates output in ROOT ntuple format @strong{for NLO event generation only}. 
For details on the ntuple format, see @ref{A posteriori scale and PDF variations using the ROOT NTuple Output}.
This output option is available only if Sherpa was linked to ROOT during 
installation by using the configure option @code{--enable-root=/path/to/root}.
ROOT ntuples can be read back into Sherpa and analyzed using the option
@option{EVENT_INPUT}. This feature is described in @ref{NTuple production}.
@end table

The output can be further customized using the following options:

@table @option
@item FILE_SIZE
Number of events per file (default: unlimited).
@item NTUPLE_SIZE
File size per NTuple file (default: unlimited).
This option is deprecated. It may lead to errors in the subsequent 
processing of NTuple files. Please use @option{FILE_SIZE} instead.
@item EVT_FILE_PATH
Directory where the files will be stored.
@item OUTPUT_PRECISION
Steers the precision of all numbers written to file.
@end table

For all output formats except ROOT and Delphes, events can be written directly 
to gzipped files instead of plain text. The option @option{--enable-gzip} 
must be given during installation to enable this feature.

@node Scale and PDF variations
@subsection Scale and PDF variations
Sherpa can compute alternative event weights for different scale and 
PDF choices on-the-fly, resulting in alternative weights for the generated 
event. The can be evoked with the following syntax
@verbatim
SCALE_VARIATIONS <muR-fac-1>,<muF-fac-1>[,<PDF-1>]  <muR-fac-1>,<muF-fac-1>[,<PDF-1>] ...
@end verbatim
The key word @code{SCALE_VARIATIONS} takes a space separated list of 
variation factors for the nominal renormalisation and factorisation scale 
and an associated PDF set. Any set present in any of the PDF library interfaces
loaded through @code{PDF_LIBRARY} can be used. If no PDF set is given it 
defaults to the nominal one. Specific PDF members can be 
specified by appending the PDF set name with @code{/<member-id>}. The 
short-hand appendix @code{[all]} will provide the variations for all 
members of the given set (only works with LHAPDF6 sets or the internal default
set).  Please note: scales are, as always in Sherpa, given in their quadratic
form.  Thus, a variation of factor 4 of the squared scale [GeV^2] means a
variation of factor 2 on the scale itself [GeV].

PDF variations on their own can also be invoked by giving the list of 
PDF sets to be reweighted to to @code{PDF_VARIATIONS}.

Thus, a complete variation using the PDF4LHC convention would read
@verbatim
  SCALE_VARIATIONS 0.25,0.25 0.25,1. 1.,0.25 1.,1. 1.,4. 4.,1. 4.,4.;
  PDF_VARIATIONS CT10nlo[all] MMHT2014nlo68cl[all] NNPDF30_nlo_as_0118[all];
@end verbatim
Please note, this syntax will create 7+53+51+101=212 additional weights
for each event.

The additional event weights can then be written into the event output. 
However, this is currently only supported for @code{HepMC_GenEvent} and 
@code{HepMC_Short} with versions >2.06 and @code{HEPMC_USE_NAMED_WEIGHTS=1}. 
The alternative event weights follow the Les Houches naming convention 
for such variations, ie. they are named @code{MUR<fac>_MUF<fac>_PDF<id>}.
When using Sherpa's interface to Rivet, @ref{Rivet analyses}, separate 
instances of Rivet, one for each alternative event weight in addition to 
the nominal one, are instantiated leading to one set of histograms each.
They are again named using the @code{MUR<fac>_MUF<fac>_PDF<id>} convention.

The user must also be aware that, of course, the cross section of the 
event sample, changes when using an alternative event weight as compared 
to the nominal one. Any histograming therefore has to account for this 
and recompute the total cross section as the sum of weights devided by the 
number of trials, cf. @ref{Cross section determination}.

The on-the-fly reweighting works for all event generation modes (weighted or
(partially) unweighted) and all calculation types (LO, LOPS, NLO, NLOPS,
MEPS@@LO, MEPS@@NLO and MENLOPS).  However, it does not include the reweighting
of parton shower emissions per default, which is an experimental feature in
Sherpa 2.2.0.

@node MPI parallelization
@subsection MPI parallelization
MPI parallelization in Sherpa can be enabled using the configuration
option @option{--enable-mpi}. Sherpa supports
@uref{http://www.open-mpi.org/,,OpenMPI}
and
@uref{http://www.mcs.anl.gov/research/projects/mpich2/,,MPICH2}
. For detailed instructions on how to run a parallel program, please refer
to the documentation of your local cluster resources or the many excellent 
introductions on the internet. MPI parallelization is mainly intended to speed up
the integration process, as event generation can be parallelized trivially 
by starting multiple instances of Sherpa with different random seed, cf.
@ref{RANDOM_SEED}. However, both the internal analysis module and the Root
NTuple writeout can be used with MPI. Note that these require substantial 
data transfer.

Please note that the process information contained in the @code{Process}
directory for both Amegic and Comix needs to be generated without
MPI parallelization first. Therefore, first run
@verbatim
Sherpa -f <run-card> INIT_ONLY=1
@end verbatim
and, in case of using Amegic, compile the libraries. Then start your
parallized integration, e.g.
@verbatim
mpirun -n <n> Sherpa -f <run-card>
@end verbatim
