@node Shower Parameters
@section Parton showers

The shower setup is covered by the `(shower)' section of
the steering file or the shower data file `Shower.dat',
respectively.


The following parameters are used to steer the shower setup.

@menu
* SHOWER_GENERATOR::      Tag to set Sherpa's shower generator.
* JET_CRITERION::         Tag to set Sherpa's jet criterion.
* MASSIVE_PS::            Tag to treat partons as massive in the shower.
* MASSLESS_PS::           Tag to treat partons as massless in the shower.

* CS Shower options::     Options for Sherpa's default shower.         
@end menu


@node SHOWER_GENERATOR
@subsection SHOWER_GENERATOR

The only full-fledged shower currently available in Sherpa is 
@option{CSS}, and this is the default for this tag. See the 
module summaries in @ref{Basic structure} for details about 
this shower. For cross-checks in pure parton shower setups,
one can use @option{Dire}. In this case, one also needs to 
set @option{CSS_IS_AS_FAC=1}, @option{CSS_FS_AS_FAC=1}, 
@option{CSS_IS_PT2MIN=3}, and @option{CSS_FS_PT2MIN=3}.

Other shower modules are in principle supported and more
choices will be provided by Sherpa in the near future.
To list all available shower modules, the tag 
@code{SHOW_SHOWER_GENERATORS=1} can be specified on the
command line. 

@code{SHOWER_GENERATOR=None} switches parton showering off completely.
However, even in the case of strict fixed order calculations, this might
not be the desired behaviour as, for example, then neither the METS scale
setter, cf. @ref{SCALES}, nor Sudakov rejection weights can be employed.
To circumvent when using the CS Shower see @ref{CS Shower options}.

@node JET_CRITERION
@subsection JET_CRITERION

The only natively supported option in Sherpa is @option{CSS}, 
and this is also the default. The corresponding jet criterion is described 
in @mycite{Hoeche2009rj}. A custom jet criterion, tailored to a specific
experimental analysis, can be supplied using Sherpa's plugin mechanism.

@node MASSIVE_PS
@subsection MASSIVE_PS

This option instructs Sherpa to treat certain partons as massive 
in the shower, which have been considered massless by the matrix element.
The argument is a list of parton flavours, for example @option{MASSIVE_PS 4 5},
if both c- and b-quarks are to be treated as massive.

@node MASSLESS_PS
@subsection MASSLESS_PS

When hard decays are used, Sherpa treats all flavours as massive in the parton
shower. This option instructs Sherpa to treat certain partons as massless
in the shower nonetheless. The argument is a list of parton flavours, for
example @option{MASSLESS_PS 1 2 3}, if u-, d- and s-quarks are to be treated
as massless.

@node CS Shower options
@subsection CS Shower options
@cindex CSS_KIN_SCHEME
@cindex CSS_IS_PT2MIN
@cindex CSS_FS_PT2MIN
@cindex CSS_IS_AS_FAC
@cindex CSS_FS_AS_FAC
@cindex CSS_EW_MODE
@cindex CSS_NOEM
@cindex CSS_MAXEM
@cindex CSS_MASS_THRESHOLD
@cindex CSS_EVOLUTION_SCHEME
@cindex CSS_SCALE_SCHEME

Sherpa's default shower module is based on @mycite{Schumann2007mg}.
A new ordering parameter for initial state splitters was introduced 
in @mycite{Hoeche2009rj} and a novel recoil strategy for initial state 
splittings was proposed in @mycite{Hoeche2009xc}. 
While the ordering variable is fixed, the recoil strategy for dipoles 
with initial-state emitter and final-state spectator can be changed 
for systematics studies. Setting @option{CSS_KIN_SCHEME=0} 
corresponds to using the recoil scheme proposed in @mycite{Hoeche2009xc}, 
while @option{CSS_KIN_SCHEME=1} (default) enables the original recoil strategy.
The lower cutoff of the shower evolution can be set via @option{CSS_FS_PT2MIN}
and @option{CSS_IS_PT2MIN} for final and initial state shower, respectively. 
Note that this value is specified in GeV^2. Scale factors for the evaluation
of the strong coupling in the parton shower are given by @option{CSS_FS_AS_FAC}
and @option{CSS_IS_AS_FAC}. They multiply the ordering parameter, which is
given in units of GeV^2.

By default, only QCD splitting functions are enabled in the shower.
If you also want to allow for photon splittings, you can enable them
by using @option{CSS_EW_MODE=1}. Note, that if you have leptons in your
matrix-element final state, they are by default treated by a soft
photon resummation as explained in @ref{QED Corrections}. To avoid
double counting, this has to be disabled as explained in that section.

The CS Shower can be forced not to emit any partons setting
@option{CSS_NOEM=1}. Sudakov rejection weights for merged samples
are calculated nontheless. Setting @option{CSS_MAXEM=<N>}, on the
other hand, forces the CS Shower to truncate its evolution at the
Nth emission. This setting, however does not necessarily compute all
Sudakov weights correctly. Both settings still enable the CS Shower
to be used in the METS scale setter, cf. @ref{SCALES}.

The evolution variable of the CS shower can be changed using 
@option{CSS_EVOLUTION_SCHEME}. Two options are currently implemented,
which correspond to transverse momentum ordering (option 0) and modified
transverse momentum ordering (option 1). The scale at which the strong 
coupling for gluon splitting into quarks is evaluated can be chosen
with @option{CSS_SCALE_SCHEME}, where 0 corresponds to the ordering 
parameter and 1 corresponds to invariant mass. Additionally, the CS shower
allows to disable splittings at scales below the on-shell mass of heavy
quarks. The upper limit for the corresponding heavy quark mass is set
using @option{CSS_MASS_THRESHOLD}.
