@node SM
@subsubsection Standard Model
@cindex 1/ALPHAQED(0)
@cindex SIN2THETAW
@cindex VEV
@cindex LAMBDA
@cindex EW_SCHEME
@cindex CKMORDER
@cindex CABIBBO
@cindex A
@cindex ETA
@cindex RHO
@cindex ALPHAS(MZ)
@cindex ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE
@cindex ORDER_ALPHAS
@cindex USE_PDF_ALPHAS
@cindex WIDTH_SCHEME
@cindex MASS[<id>]
@cindex MASSIVE[<id>]
@cindex WIDTH[<id>]
@cindex ACTIVE[<id>]
@cindex STABLE[<id>]
@cindex YUKAWA[<id>]

The SM inputs for the electroweak sector can be given in four different 
schemes, that correspond to different choices of which SM physics 
parameters are considered fixed and which are derived from the given 
quantities. The input schemes are selected through the @code{EW_SCHEME} 
parameter, whose default is @option{1}. The following options are provided:
@itemize @bullet
  @item  Case @code{0}:
  
    all EW parameters are explicitly given.
    Here the W, Z and Higgs masses are taken as inputs, and
    the parameters @code{1/ALPHAQED(0)}, @code{SIN2THETAW}, @code{VEV}
    and @code{LAMBDA} have to be specified. The fine structure constant
    does not run by default. It is evaluated at scale @code{ALPHAQED_DEFAULT_SCALE},
    which defaults to the Z mass squared (note that this scale has to be specified
    in GeV squared). The parameters @code{SIN2THETAW}, 
    @code{VEV}, and @code{LAMBDA} thereby specify the weak mixing angle,
    the Higgs field vacuum expectation value, and the Higgs quartic
    coupling respectively.

    Note that this mode allows to violate the tree-level relations between
    some of the parameters and can thus not be used with the complex mass
    scheme (cf. below).
  @item  Case @code{1}:
  
    all EW parameters are calculated from the W, Z and Higgs masses and
    @code{1/ALPHAQED(0)} using tree-level relations.
  @item  Case @code{3}:
  
    this choice corresponds to the G_mu-scheme. The EW parameters are 
    calculated out of the weak gauge boson masses M_W, M_Z, the Higgs
    boson mass M_H and the Fermi constant @code{GF} using tree-level relations.
  @end itemize

The electro-weak coupling is by default not running. If its running has been
enabled (cf. @ref{COUPLINGS}), one can specify its value at zero momentum
transfer as input value by @code{1/ALPHAQED(0)}.

To account for quark mixing the CKM matrix elements have to be assigned. 
For this purpose the Wolfenstein parametrization @mycite{Wolfenstein1983yz} is
employed. The order of expansion in the lambda parameter is defined
through @code{CKMORDER}, with default @option{0} corresponding to a unit matrix.
The parameter convention for higher expansion terms reads:

@itemize @bullet
@item  @code{CKMORDER = 1}, the @code{CABIBBO} parameter has to be set,
it parametrizes lambda and has the default value @option{0.2272}.
@item  @code{CKMORDER = 2}, in addition the value of @code{A} has to
be set, its default is @option{0.818}. 
@item  @code{CKMORDER = 3}, the order lambda^3 expansion, @code{ETA}
and @code{RHO} have to be specified. Their default values are @option{0.349} 
and @option{0.227}, respectively.
@end itemize


The remaining parameter to fully specify the Standard Model 
is the strong coupling constant at the Z-pole, given through
@code{ALPHAS(MZ)}. Its default value is @option{0.118}. If the setup
at hand involves hadron collisions and thus PDFs, the value of the
strong coupling constant is automatically set consistent with the PDF fit
and can not be changed by the user. If Sherpa is compiled with LHAPDF
support, it is also possible to use the alphaS evolution provided
in LHAPDF by specifying @code{USE_PDF_ALPHAS=1}. The perturbative order
of the running of the strong coupling can be set via @code{ORDER_ALPHAS},
where the default @option{0} corresponds to one-loop running and 
@code{1},@code{2},@code{3} to 2,3,4-loops, respectively. If the setup
at hand involves PDFs, this parameter is set consistent with the information
provided by the PDF set.

If unstable particles (e.g. W/Z bosons) appear as intermediate propagators
in the process, Sherpa uses the complex mass scheme to construct MEs
in a gauge-invariant way. For full consistency with this scheme,
by default the dependent EW parameters are also calculated from the complex
masses (@option{WIDTHSCHEME=CMS}), yielding complex values e.g. for
the weak mixing angle.
To keep the parameters real one can set @option{WIDTHSCHEME=Fixed}. This may
spoil gauge invariance though.

With the following switches it is possible to change the properties of
all fundamental particles:

@table @code
@item MASS[<id>]
Sets the mass (in GeV) of the particle with PDG id @option{<id>}.
@*
Masses of particles and corresponding anti-particles are always set
simultaneously.
@*
For particles with Yukawa couplings, those are enabled/disabled consistent with the
mass (taking into account the MASSIVE flag) by default, but that can be modified
using the @option{YUKAWA[<id>]} parameter. Note that by default the Yukawa
couplings are treated as running, cf. @ref{YUKAWA_MASSES}.

@item MASSIVE[<id>]
Specifies whether the finite mass of particle with PDG id @option{<id>}
is to be considered in matrix-element calculations or not.

@item WIDTH[<id>]
Sets the width (in GeV) of the particle with PDG id @option{<id>}.

@item ACTIVE[<id>]
Enables/disables the particle with PDG id @option{<id>}.

@item STABLE[<id>]
Sets the particle with PDG id @option{<id>} either stable or unstable according
to the following options:
@table @option
@item 0
Particle and anti-particle are unstable
@item 1
Particle and anti-particle are stable
@item 2
Particle is stable, anti-particle is unstable
@item 3
Particle is unstable, anti-particle is stable
@end table
This option applies to decays of hadrons (cf. @ref{Hadron decays}) as well
as particles produced in the hard scattering (cf. @ref{Hard decays}).
For the latter, alternatively the decays can be specified explicitly in the
process setup (see @ref{Processes}) to avoid the narrow-width approximation.

@item PRIORITY[<id>]
Allows to overwrite the default automatic flavour sorting in a process by specifying a priority for the given flavour. This way one can identify certain particles which are part of a container (e.g. massless b-quarks), such that their position can be used reliably in selectors and scale setters.

@end table

Note: To set properties of hadrons, you can use the same switches (except for
@code{MASSIVE}) in the fragmentation section, see @ref{Hadronization}.
