@node QED Corrections
@section QED corrections

Higher order QED corrections are effected both on hard interaction and, upon
their formation, on each hadron's subsequent decay. The Photons
@mycite{Schonherr2008av} module is called in both cases for this task. It
employes a YFS-type resummation @mycite{Yennie1961ad} of all infrared singular
terms to all orders and is equipped with complete first order corrections for
the most relevant cases (all other ones receive approximate real emission
corrections built up by Catani-Seymour splitting kernels).

@menu
* General Switches::
* QED Corrections to the Hard Interaction::
* QED Corrections to Hadron Decays::
@end menu

@node General Switches
@subsection General Switches

The relevant switches to steer the higher order QED
corrections reside in the `(fragmentation)' section
of the steering file or the fragmentation data file
`Fragmentation.dat', respectively.

@menu
* YFS_MODE::           Mode of operation.
* YFS_USE_ME::         Use ME-corrections if possible.
* YFS_IR_CUTOFF::      Infrared threshold for real photon generation.
@end menu

@node YFS_MODE
@subsubsection YFS_MODE
@cindex YFS_MODE
The keyword @code{YFS_MODE = [0,1,2]} determines the
mode of operation of Photons. @code{YFS_MODE = 0} switches Photons off.
Consequently, neither the hard interaction nor any hadron decay will be
corrected for soft or hard photon emission. @code{YFS_MODE = 1} sets
the mode to "soft only", meaning soft emissions will be treated
correctly to all orders but no hard emission corrections will be
included. With @code{YFS_MODE = 2} these hard emission corrections will
also be included up to first order in alpha_QED. This is the default setting.

@node YFS_USE_ME
@subsubsection YFS_USE_ME
@cindex YFS_USE_ME
The switch @code{YFS_USE_ME = [0,1]} tells Photons how to correct hard
emissions to first order in alpha_QED. If @code{YFS_USE_ME = 0}, then
Photons will use collinearly approximated real emission matrix elements. Virtual
emission matrix elements of order alpha_QED are ignored. If, however,
YFS_USE_ME=1, then exact real and/or virtual emission matrix elements
are used wherever possible. These are presently available for V->FF, V->SS,
S->FF, S->SS, S->Slnu, S->Vlnu type decays, Z->FF decays and leptonic tau and W
decays. For all other decay types general collinearly approximated matrix
elements are used. In both approaches all hadrons are treated as point-like
objects. The default setting is @code{YFS_USE_ME = 1}. This switch is only
effective if @code{YFS_MODE = 2}.

@node YFS_IR_CUTOFF
@subsubsection YFS_IR_CUTOFF
@cindex YFS_IR_CUTOFF
@code{YFS_IR_CUTOFF} sets the infrared cut-off dividing the real emission in two
regions, one containing the infrared divergence, the other the "hard" emissions.
This cut-off is currently applied in the rest frame of the multipole of the
respective decay. It also serves as a minimum photon energy in this frame for
explicit photon generation for the event record. In contrast, all photons below
with energy less than this cut-off will be assumed to have negligible impact on
the final-state momentum distributions. The default is
@code{YFS_IR_CUTOFF = 1E-3} (GeV). Of course, this switch is only effective if
Photons is switched on, i.e. @code{YFS_MODE = [1,2]}.


@node QED Corrections to the Hard Interaction
@subsection QED Corrections to the Hard Interaction

The switch to steer QED corrections to the hard scatter resides in the '(me)'
section of the steering file or the matrix element data file `ME.dat', 
respectively.

@menu
* ME_QED::                       Mode of operation.
* ME_QED_CLUSTERING::            Identify and preserve resonances.
* ME_QED_CLUSTERING_THRESHOLD::  Threshold for identifying resonances.
@end menu

@node ME_QED
@subsubsection ME_QED
@cindex ME_QED
@code{ME_QED = On}/@code{Off} turns the higher order QED corrections to the
matrix element on or off, respectively. The default is @option{On}. Switching
QED corrections to the matrix element off has no effect on
@ref{QED Corrections to Hadron Decays}.
The QED corrections to the matrix element will only be effected on final state
not strongly interacting particles. If a resonant production subprocess for an
unambiguous subset of all such particles is specified via the process
declaration (cf. @ref{Processes}) this can be taken into account and dedicated
higher order matrix elements can be used (if @code{YFS_MODE = 2} and
@code{YFS_USE_ME = 1}).

@node ME_QED_CLUSTERING
@subsubsection ME_QED_CLUSTERING
@cindex ME_QED_CLUSTERING
@code{ME_QED_CLUSTERING = On}/@code{Off} switches the phase space point
dependent identification of possible resonances within the hard matrix
element on or off, respectively. The default is @option{On}.
Resonances are identified by recombining the electroweak final state of
the matrix element into resonances that are allowed by the model.
Competing resonances are identified by their on-shell-ness, i.e.
the distance of the decay product's invariant mass from the nominal
resonance mass in units of the resonance width.

@node ME_QED_CLUSTERING_THRESHOLD
@subsubsection ME_QED_CLUSTERING_THRESHOLD
@cindex ME_QED_CLUSTERING_THRESHOLD
Sets the maximal distance of the decay product invariant mass from the
nominal resonance mass in units of the resonance width in order for the
resonance to be identified. The default is
@option{ME_QED_CLUSTERING_THRESHOLD = 1}.

@node QED Corrections to Hadron Decays
@subsection QED Corrections to Hadron Decays

If the Photons module is switched on, all hadron decays are corrected for higher
order QED effects.

